Soft drinks
What is a soft drink? The term itself helps us to understand this. A soft drink is any drink that isn’t ‘hard’, that is, non-alcoholic. Technically, tea and drinking water are also considered1 soft drinks. But usually when talking about soft drinks people mean sweet carbonated2 drinks. Such drinks can also be called ‘pop’, ‘fizz’, or ‘soda’.

Two types of sweet drinks made way3 for soft drinks to emerge4. In the Middle East, sharbat (or sherbet) has been a popular sweet drink since the medieval times. It is served cold, and is usually made of rose water, lemons, oranges and fragrant5 herbs. In Western Europe, lemonade has been a popular drink since the 17th century. It was made with drinking water, honey6 and lemon juice.

But the real soft drinks were made possible only with the appearance7 of carbonated water (also called sparkling, fizzy, or seltzer water). English chemist Joseph Priestley invented it by accident8 in 1767. Mass production of carbonated water in Europe began in 1781. Carbonated water usually was sold in pharmacies9. It was advertised10 as having a good effect on the overall health of a consumer11. Soon enough, first attempts at sweetening were made by various apothecaries12. One of more popular drinks was carbonated water mixed with quinine13. It was thought to prevent14 malaria. This ‘tonic water’ would later be a foundation of a mixed gin and tonic drink.

Another major breakthrough15 in the industry was usage of a kola nut. In the late 19th century, two American pharmacists, John Pemberton and Caleb Bradham, independently16 of each other added an extract of kola to their carbonated drinks. The result, which today we call a cola drink, is now one of the most popular soft drinks worldwide. Two companies were founded17 to sell both drinks, and those two companies became bitter rivals18 very fast. This rivalry is still going strong nowadays. The recipes for those drinks are guarded as very valuable19 trade secrets.

In the first half of the 20th century, a metal can to hold carbonated drinks was invented. Soda vending machines have also appeared as a distinct part of any mall20 or small restaurant in the USA. The soft drink industry has grown to be one of the largest out there. An average person in the USA would consume as much as 150 litres of soft drinks per year as of 2019. This obsession21 with soft drinks was reflected22 in some satirical works of art, and signifies23 major health concerns24 possibly for anyone out there.